Weiqi bibliography
About 15 articles/essays/books
About 30 sources in total including webpages

Copied from syllabus:
{
Texts:
Public library books due to return on Mar. 6: 
The Book of Go by William S Cobb (includes portable Go board).

Winning Go by Richard Bozulich and Peter Shotwell.
Go basics by P. Shotwell (includes interactive CD).

Stepping Stones to Go by Shigemi Kishikawa.

The Theory and Practice of Go translated and edited by Samuel P King and George K Leckie.

A Go Miscellany: The Treasure Chest Enigma by Noriyuki Nakayama.
Chapter on the masculinity of junzi: The Art of Resigning.


Others:
Deep Learning Alphago article on Fusion Search and movie (available on Youtube) and ColdFusion (coincidentally named) Alphago video.

Hikaru no Go anime or manga (if not enough anime episodes).

The Surrounding Game doc.

Weiqi and Masculinity in China article on Fusion Search.

Go in the Tale of Genji: 
The Tale of Genji, trans. Dennis Washburn (WW Norton, 2015) ISBN 978-0393353396
Critical Readings (Short PDF files posted on Tale of Genji Canvas).
}


https://www.douban.com/note/354412262/
has about 40 references to Go articles. Originally compiled by Bob High, director of AIG (American Ing Goe society). Written on douban by 2 Chinese authors.

Why the West plays chess and the East plays Go
By Peter Shotwell
Found on Fusion search and also referenced on douban.

github nixboard

https://storage.googleapis.com/deepmind-media/alphago/AlphaGoNaturePaper.pdf
From before Lee Se-dol
Alphago probably named after Google’s parent company Alphabet Inc, not like alpha male. 
There is also AlphaFold which will likely be folding proteins of Wuhan virus.

https://arxiv.org/abs/1712.01815
After beating Shogi as well

https://deepmind.com/blog/article/AlphaFold-Using-AI-for-scientific-discovery
Same company as AlphaGo, using machine learning for disease protein folding in the game Foldit
Jan 2020

Goe songbook (albeit American)

Go club (not as open as the sites and signs say)

Fusion search
Competing for a Better Role Relation: International Relations, Sino-US Rivalry and Game of Weiqi
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs11366-019-09638-7
also on http://eds.a.ebscohost.com/eds/viewarticle/render?data=dGJyMPPp44rp2%2fdV0%2bnjisfk5Ie46bFQr661Sq%2bk63nn5Kx94um%2bS62otUewprBInq%2b4Sq%2bwrlGexss%2b8ujfhvHX4Yzn5eyB4rOrSrCusFG0qbBJpOLfhuWz44ak2uBV49rxi%2bjppIzf3btZzJzfhrvb4ovx4PFGwqvCTsOuwVqk3O2K69fyVeTr6oTy2%2faM&vid=8&sid=892abcb2-3ae2-4372-a3d4-479fa8a0e3bc@sessionmgr4007
Login with Fusion search or Athens for full article
勢 power
references Moskowitz
"Last but not least, weiqi allows a player to accept defeat and resign at any time, without having to count the amount of space each player has taken. Practically, players save time this way, so they can start another game."
also has many references to articles, like:
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs41111-016-0015-1 
Which seems to refute Wikipedia's statement that Go is a zero-sum game. I think this source and others also describe the 4 arts as being weiqi, music (which the CCTV documentary describes as being specifically the guqin, as Prof. Kumiko Uyeda said about Confucius), shu (not the character for book)/calligraphy, and painting. In the capstone syllabus, I mistakenly wrote poetry instead of painting.

https://www.usfca.edu/center-asia-pacific/perspectives/v15n1/hird 
Weiqi mentioned
Fall 2017 Article
In League with Gentlemen: Junzi Masculinity and the Chinese Nation in Cultural Nationalist Discourses
By Derek Hird, University of Westminster

Not to be confused with Marc Moskowitz's article actually titled Weiqi And Masculinity:
Go Nation : Chinese Masculinities and the Game of Weiqi in China
by Marc L. Moskowitz
https://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/usflibrary-ebooks/detail.action?docID=1350171 
Jhu.org
Jstor
https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/17739556-go-nation ("Amazon prime read free" but book is almost $1000 in print, only $16 kindle)


//////////copy-pasted
Deep Learning and the Game of Go / Max Pumperla.
Detail Only Available

eBook
By: Pumperla, Max. Manning Publications, 2019. 1 online resource (384 pages) Language: English, Database: Ignacio: USF Libraries Catalog

Summary: Deep Learning and the Game of Go introduces deep learning by teaching you to build a Go-winning bot. As you progress, you'll apply increasingly complex training techniques and strategies...

Subjects: Electronic books
Add to folder
[View Online] View Online View in Catalog
3.
Go Nation : Chinese Masculinities and the Game of Weiqi in China
Full Text Available
Book Jacket

eBook
By: Moskowitz, Marc L. Series: Asia: Local Studies / Global Themes. Berkeley : University of California Press. 2013. eBook., Database: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost)

Go (Weiqi in Chinese) is one of the most popular games in East Asia, with a steadily increasing fan base around the world. Like chess, Go is a logic game but it is much older, with written record...

Subjects: SOCIAL SCIENCE / Anthropology / Cultural & Social; HISTORY / Asia / General; SPORTS & RECREATION / History; Games--Social aspects--China; Go (Game)--China
Add to folder
PDF Full Text EPUB Full Text
PlumX Metrics
Show Table of Contents Table of ContentsShow this area Most Relevant Pages From This eBook
4.
Development of cognitive and neurodynamic function of 6-year-old children using the integrated application of the game of Go and exercise of game character.
Full Text Available

Academic Journal
KOZINA, ZHANNETA; ABROSIMOV, EVGENII; SAFRONOV, DANIL; PERETYAHA, LYUDMILA; DOVZHENKO, TETIANA; BUGAYETS, NATALIA, Journal of Physical Education & Sport Dec2018, Vol. 18 Issue 4, p2483 (English Abstract Available), Database: SPORTDiscus with Full Text

The purpose of the work is to identify the features of the dynamics of cognitive and neurodynamic functions of children 6 years old when using the game of Go in combination with physical exercise...

Subjects: PHYSICAL education; PHYSICAL activity
[Despite being labelled as Phys. Ed., the article's game of Go is indeed Igo and not some other game.
http://eds.a.ebscohost.com/eds/pdfviewer/pdfviewer?vid=11&sid=892abcb2-3ae2-4372-a3d4-479fa8a0e3bc%40sessionmgr4007
Part of the reason why I often use the word weiqi instead of Go is because one syllable can lack precise SEO and clarity, although weiqi also yields chemistry results in Fusion search]
Add to folder
PDF Full Text (1.5MB)


5.
Modeling the Game of Go by Ising Hamiltonian, Deep Belief Networks and Common Fate Graphs
Detail Only Available

Academic Journal
By: Rojas-Dominguez, A.; Barradas-Baustista, D.; Alvarado, M.. In: IEEE Access Access, IEEE. 7:120117-120127 2019; USA: IEEE Language: English, Database: IEEE Xplore Digital Library

Three different models of the game of Go are developed by establishing an analogy between this game and physical systems susceptible to analysis under the well-known Ising model in two dimensions...

Subjects: Aerospace; Bioengineering; Communication, Networking and Broadcast Technologies; Components, Circuits, Devices and Systems; Computing and Processing; Engineered Materials, Dielectrics and Plasmas; Engineering Profession; Fields, Waves and Electromagnetics; General Topics for Engineers; Geoscience; Nuclear Engineering; Photonics and Electrooptics; Power, Energy and Industry Applications; Robotics and Control Systems; Signal Processing and Analysis; Transportation; Games; Analytical models; Biological system modeling; Adaptation models; Computational modeling; Energy measurement; Atomic measurements; Artificial intelligence; graphical model; machine learning; Monte Carlo methods; pattern analysis; unsupervised learning
Add to folder
Full Text FinderFull Text Finder
PlumX Metrics
6.
Playing Go without Game Tree Search Using Convolutional Neural Networks
Detail Only Available

Report
By: Barratt, Jeffrey; Pan, Chuanbo. 07/02/2019 , Database: arXiv

The game of Go has a long history in East Asian countries, but the field of Computer Go has yet to catch up to humans until the past couple of years. While the rules of Go are simple, the strateg...

Subjects: Computer Science - Artificial Intelligence; Computer Science - Machine Learning
Add to folder
Full TextFull Text
/////////////copy-pasted
A GFML-based Robot Agent for Human and Machine Cooperative Learning on Game of Go
Detail Only Available

Report
By: Lee, Chang-Shing; Wang, Mei-Hui; Chen, Li-Chuang; Nojima, Yusuke; Huang, Tzong-Xiang; Woo, Jinseok; Kubota, Naoyuki; Sato-Shimokawara, Eri; Yamaguchi, Toru. 01/22/2019 , Database: arXiv

This paper applies a genetic algorithm and fuzzy markup language to construct a human and smart machine cooperative learning system on game of Go. The genetic fuzzy markup language (GFML)-based R...

Subjects: Computer Science - Artificial Intelligence
Add to folder
Full TextFull Text
9.
PFML-based Semantic BCI Agent for Game of Go Learning and Prediction
Detail Only Available

Report
By: Lee, Chang-Shing; Wang, Mei-Hui; Ko, Li-Wei; Tsai, Bo-Yu; Tsai, Yi-Lin; Yang, Sheng-Chi; Lin, Lu-An; Lee, Yi-Hsiu; Ohashi, Hirofumi; Kubota, Naoyuki; Shuo, Nan. 01/09/2019 , Database: arXiv

This paper presents a semantic brain computer interface (BCI) agent with particle swarm optimization (PSO) based on a Fuzzy Markup Language (FML) for Go learning and prediction applications. Addi...

Subjects: Computer Science - Artificial Intelligence; Computer Science - Human-Computer Interaction
Add to folder
Full Text
////////

"La culture arrogante du go [Le weiqi, une façon chinoise de voir le monde]: Le weiqi, une façon chinoise de voir le monde" by Elisabeth Papineau in French. I do not know French but this article seems to criticize the culture of Go.
http://eds.a.ebscohost.com/eds/detail/detail?vid=0&sid=622bf846-702e-4728-803c-9586ade5156c%40sessionmgr4007&bdata=JkF1dGhUeXBlPXNzbyZzaXRlPWVkcy1saXZlJnNjb3BlPXNpdGU%3d#AN=edsper.perch.1021.9013.2000.num.62.1.2569&db=edsper
links to full article: 
https://www.persee.fr/doc/perch_1021-9013_2000_num_62_1_2569
Mentions L'art de la guerre de Sunzi (Art of War) on its 3rd page, page 47 of the journal it is from. Given the Art of War documentary on Youtube, which also references the game of Go, Sunzi (Sun-tzu) did indeed seem like an arrogant man back then, because he killed an innocent concubine to prove a point.

https://amedleyofpotpourri.blogspot.com/2019/05/chinese-culture.html?m=1
Mohism, weiqi

Why the west plays chess and the east plays go"
Keywords mojia weiqi
By peter shotwell



http://www.supersummary.com/the-tale-of-genji/summary/
Hikaru Genji

https://m.youtube.com/watch?v=KsYl8-yTsHA 
Cicada woman chapter genji


Hikaru no Go (like Hikaru Genji)
If possible find Bokuno Cup special episode

https://www.essaywriting.expert/essay-on-mencius-and-xunzi/
Mencius statue with short nails (worn down more than Kongzi from playing Go?)


“An anecdote titled "Two Students Learn Weiqi" (二子学弈), collected in the ca. 300 BC philosophical book Mencius, revolves around Yi Qiu and his two disciples, whose attitudes were in stark contrast with one another.[3] The first student was easily distracted, whereas the other was focused and diligent in studying weiqi. Consequently, the former found no success whereas the latter excelled in the game. Mencius used this tale to expound that even a simple game like Weiqi demands one's full attention.[4] This is also the earliest known historical reference to weiqi, making Yi Qiu the first recorded weiqi player in history.[5][6][7]” Wikipedia Yi Qiu

“
Addiction to Weiqi was considered by the Chinese philosopher Mencius (372-289BC) one of the five types of unfilial behavior.” HuffPo
https://www.huffpost.com/entry/weiqi-versus-chess_b_6974686 

“Just one game, they said. That was yesterday.” SFPL book proverb Ancient China.


361 days Ancient China calendar, 19x19=361 intersections on board, black and white day and night
    - Hikaru No Go’s Go Go Igo ep. 60-72


https://gobase.org/reading/history/china/


围棋
(圍棋) [ wéiqí ] the game of Go
archchinese.com


The Glass Bead Game 1 page essay by Ernest Brown
Referenced by a douban .com english page with other articles listed

Originally I thought the Knight’s Move (As referenced in Hikaru No Go and NHK Go tournament videos on Youtube) was named after the knight in European chess but Xiangqi also has the same knight’s move.
-My roommate Irene from Shenzhen

“But for some reason, men are stronger Go players” -Haylee’s World of Go/Baduk, “How I became a Go professional” video. Peak rank 9 d. 
I doubted the gender skill divide so I watched a match between the female Hon’inbo and a 7 dan male player and the female Honinbo actually lost.
This may be because according to the first chapter of the Treasure Chest Enigma, by Peter Shotwell, “women have busier lives than men so do not have as much time to spend on such puzzles.”

https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Go_ranks_and_ratings


Lee Se-dol went on to win a tournament after losing to AlphaGo (source: AlphaGo documentary) but later on retired and scheduled to play against another program with a 2 stone handicap. “Even if I become number one...” (source: duckduckgo search). However [spoiler], retiring does not necessarily mean quitting, as Hikaru no Go explains.

“In Asia, there is not as much stigma like there is in the West for becoming an expert/genius at the expense of letting the physical body deteriorate, like we see in The Theory of Everything.”



“Early writings depicted Weiqi as a waste of time, but eventually became included in the four noble things of gentry.”

“I remember the chill of the Go stones” -Fujiwara-no-Sai in Hikaru no Go. Go stones are indeed a little chilly. Boards are indeed made of wood. Placing stones on the intersections of the trenched lines probably makes them less likely to move around.

Go stones can literally be stones or bottle-caps (Hikaru No Go’s Go Go Igo live action videos) (or expensively made from large white seashells (source: Chinese weiqi documentary series of Go even in jail and also in religion)). A kifu is a record of a game on paper (Hikaru No Go). With these things in mind, Go can be played with just paper sheets and a pen. Although Go is “a very hard game” (librarian), there are less physical limitations and rules to learn than chess.

Expensive quality Go boards are made with kaya wood which is light colored and produces a sharp clack when a stone is placed. Fake kaya called shin-kaya is often made from imported spruce to Japan and has the same color but lacks the sound. There is also another type of wood for boards. (Hikaru no Go).

The Japanese Robotics Innovations speaker who was a robotics patent decider particularly for toy robots and also video games, told me about the relation of AI to the game of shogi.

My favorite part of the talk was how he explained the need for robotics due to Japan’s aging population.

Hon’inbo Shusaku (surname) Torajiro (given name) died early in his 30s due to an epidemic. Shusaku invented Shusaku’s Diagonal, “a series of opening moves that remains popular in games without komi” (Go Go Igo).

There is also an app game called BadukPop which has powerups (Haylee’s World of Go).

Hikaru no Go has an episode “No winning allowed” in which the challenge is to play to a perfect draw without the opponent realizing what the pro is doing. 

(Rated  TV-MA) “Misaeng” episode 1,3 on Netflix, a Korean series about a failed Go/baduk prodigy. But I only found it by searching for 囲碁　in Japanese. Episode 1 shows the pronunciation of Baduk/Paduk 바둑.

Hikaru no Go Chinese Mandarin dub: 棋靈王
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H-vYfpSRByc&list=PL3vk5NhxtTzgrBj28-S6ghfG3ESnACzR8

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L29nQpXm6Lw&list=PL3vk5NhxtTzgrBj28-S6ghfG3ESnACzR8&index=76
棋靈王OVA 邁向北斗杯之路 HD ~喜歡的話!!幫訂閱Q3Q

Shuusaku (long U)
-Hikaru no Go manga 171,172

Sanitation in Go is important because in Go Salons, the stones need to be washed (Source, Hikaru no Go). Perhaps a reason that wooden Go boards have prevailed over plastic (besides in magnetic Go boards, probably) is because wooden cutting boards are supposedly more antibacterial than plastic cutting boards (source: https://www.rowandsons.co.uk/blog/myth-fact-antibacterial-properties-wood/ although this site sells wooden and plastic cutting boards, it references this article: https://www.johnboos.com/uploads/files/PDF/wood-vs-plastic-cutting-boards.pdf although this site also sells wooden cutting boards. Also, water in wooden cups or plastic bottles with bamboo chopsticks smells less stale than water in ceramic cups (without chopsticks) or plastic bottles without chopsticks). 

Part 1 2 3 weiqi history, emporor Yao’s son. Preset stones.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W0gSVWceSuc 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YmpXJBOf4zo 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BPvP9hviqIA 

https://www.quora.com/What-did-Confucius-say-about-the-game-of-weiqi-Go?share=1 
Answer 2


Weiqi is often compared to war or the creation of starry galaxies (Hikaru no Go, Ernest Brown's The Glass Bead Game), but weiqi seems more like white blood cells consuming their enemies. The ease in which AlphaGo transitioned to folding proteins shows how realistic weiqi looks, especially on a molecular or cellular scale.

The art of resigning (The Treasure Chest Enigma book) could be used not only with human vs. AI matches but also during AI training with itself, as it may speed up the process (with the expense of reduced meticulousness). The Art of Resigning chapter says the main difference between pros and amateurs is that pros resign more often. This may be because pros are more able to see a match's fate (Sai in Hikaru-no-go) and also because resigning helps give players more training time to become pros. It is not quite clear from papers and README documentations as to whether AIs already implement resignation for training with itself. Looking at the code might be necessary. However, it is difficult even to simply program the rules of Go because capturing involves analyzing many links between stones. Quality Go game emulators are sometimes only commented with Chinese. A way to test the effectiveness of resigning could be to give at least 4 virtual players the same amount of time to play multiple games, with 2 players playing to resign and the other 2 players playing out the entire games without resigning.

A way to make Go more appealng to women might be to label it more like Candy Crush and focus more on the eating aspect of the game rather than the surrounding part.


https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K7X2l2MKTNs <- Go Game School
"Onegaishimasu" at the beginning of games, as also subtitled in Hikaru no Go.

The proper way of holding Go a stone is between the index finger and middle finger with the index finger underneath the stone (Source: Hikaru no Go's ending lessons Go Go Igo Let's Play Go). This is true in Japanese, Korean, and CHinese videos as well. However, there are different ways of resigning. In the Hikaru no Go animations, the method of resignation in-person was to bow one's head and say "I resign." Afterwards, the other player says, "Thank you (arigato) very much for the game." In online Go, when the opponent resigned, a pop-up notification says "没了" meaning "Resigned". I typed 没了 in Chinese as I don't know Japanese but the characters are almost if not exactly the same. In Chinese pinyin, it would be spelled "mei le".

Terms for move spacings in Go like the knight's move and the elephant's eye (hazama) probably come from Xiangqi (象棋, the Elephant Game, Chinese Chess) even though Go/Weiqi came first. 



https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WXuK6gekU1Y&list=PLNq5j1X6NDH7RP_VATdvb9MkGqij87NR-

^ AlphaGo movie documentary new March official link


https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6w96cPUt1vM
Styles of Go from 1800s to post-AI (not very serious)




https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3_qmLqRwvtU
Painting of emperor Yao

^ There is an actual mountain named "Rotten Axe Handle (Lanka) Mountain"
^ There are 181 black stones, 180 white stones.
I guess white goes 2nd (plays Gote instead of Sente) because clamshells are harder to find than slate. Probably not, but an idea.



From my experience playing chess with inpatient players tired of moving pawns, the preset stones in the original Go in China before Qing dynasty might have been a way to save time. It also suggests to people around that the game is ready to play, and it is not a cutting board, and since the stones alternate, it is not just somebody sorting stones by color.


https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a3DLjcoacXA&list=TLPQMjEwMzIwMjB-hgAWaAz5Ow&index=2
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lwdhp1aXcgA
To go into Byo-yomi probably means to go into overtime, when the slow player must now make each move within a certain amount of time, such as one minute for 'insei's in Hikaru no Go. searching for byo-yomi yields a Wikipedia article about time-control in board games. According to Hikaru No Go, time clocks were not used even as late as Shusaku in the 1900s.

Beginning of https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rrfpqTy5c-k&t=424s NHK cup
Stylized the 囲　in 囲碁 as a square Go board with the intersecting lines. That makes me wonder about the origin of the character but either way it is an easy way to remember how to write the character "i" in "igo". Writing is an important aspect of culture because in Chinese, culture is defined as wenhua/文化, which includes language.

Hon'inbo Shuusaku (surname, also written Shusaku) Torajiro (given name, or was it the individual name he chose for himself?) died early in his 30s from an epidemic. He has a grave in Inno-shima (shima meaning island) in Hiroshima and also in Tokyo made by his students.


According to the film A Beautiful Mind, John Nash lost a game of Go and the bet was to do laundry for the semester. (Scene found in Youtube playlist of Go and the Art of War).
And playlist also has a Minecraft implementation of Go capturing rules.


Go Minigames:
Badukpop app explained by Haylee's World of Go/Baduk
Random opening challenge https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a3DLjcoacXA&list=TLPQMjEwMzIwMjB-hgAWaAz5Ow&index=2
One-color Go (Hikaru-no-Go)
Blind Go (mentioned by Qin's Moon in the Confucists' beach, also in Hikaru no Go and in the Surrounding Game, played with a blindfold with flat white stones that I guess cannot be felt).
First capture Go (The Book of Go, Hikaru-no-Go's Go Go Igo Let's Play Go).
Go board in the shape of North America (Surrounding Game). Shows different board shapes and sizes can be used.
Original Ancient preset stones on the star points (17x17 board). Alternating colors:
black white
white black
.
Play to draw (Hikaru no Go)
"Mohist chess"/Othello/Reversi as fictionalized by Qin's Moon in the Mechanical City episodes. According to Wikipedia, Reversi was not invented until later. Mohism is also not directly linked to weiqi although often mentioned in the same webpages or articles. Mohism focuses on self-defense rather than the Art of War.
Playing without komi is another way to play, especially with Shuusaku's Diagonal (Go Go Igo). It encourages the original joseki (local skermishes shapes).

For the Hon'inbo competition, games are played over 2 days. A move is sealed hidden on paper at the end of day 1 so that the opponent does not get the night to think about it and react to it.

For my first implementation of making AI play Go, I would go easy on myself for programming and make the board even smaller than Tic-tac-toe, making it a 2 by 2 board. IF I cannot easily directly mesh an AI project with a Go project. Go boards traditionally have an odd number of lines to have a center point (Go GO Igo). In a 2 by 2 game, black would win without komi if it plays first (sente) and plays on the corner which it must and then white plays oHane (extension) adjacent to black. Black would then capture white and form 2 eyes. White must play on the diagonal to meet a draw or an endless game of recapturing.

Nigiri (choosing color stones) is in a way itself a game of rock-paper-scissors, though the end result is like a coin flip.


Nigiri is picking up a handful of stones and the opponent guesses whether the number is even or odd by placing one or two of his stones down.


It is somewhat philosophical (or arguably coincedental) that black plays first in Go but 2nd in Chess of Europe. Mohism prefers to stay in the darkness (Qin's Moon). I remember reading years back that Daoism also prefers yin/dark /soft over yang/light/hard. In a famous wuxia/fantasy movie about a fox-spirit lady, the male lead (spoiler) turns out to be a good guy partly because he wears black armor so that his comrades are not concerned by his blood. Even my parents watched that and my mother remembers it.

This is contrasted with the unfortunate terminology of Europe like blacklist and black magic which labels black as negative though Japanese also has a negative term like black company which was also referenced in the Korean Misaeng series.

But my paper should mainly focus on the art of resigning. In the post-AI NHK tournament where the female Kisei (title) won, the male player also resigned by placing one of his prisoners on the board. So the Alphago movie resignation is not just something that Lee Sedol does. 
Lee Sedol's autograph on the board he gave to Hassabis (the chess player and leader of AlphaGo) shows that his name Lee is the surname 李 which is also a Chinese character. According to the Alphago movie, Lee Sedol grew up on a farm believing that pizza grew on trees. To my surprise, Lee Sedol's game-changing God move 76 where he beat AlphaGo once was right after his smoke break. According to the web, addiction may be because nicotine temporarily increases mental function (although decreases it in the long term). I would also argue that another player who faced Alpha, Ke Jie, who later played Lee Sedol, with both of them using Kick moves like Alpha), also has a kind of addiction to prescription glasses, like me. Haylee from Haylee's World of Go also wore glasses even at a young age while her sister did not and her sister preferred to be more active.


I am not sure if it is listed in the credits or if Netflix skips the credits, but I think I recall the Japanese minor-key song in the Surrounding Game was Rokudan, played on the koto zither.


Minigame: 3 or 4 player Go with red or gold pieces (source: the controversial Chinese animation series Everlasting Firmament and also Surrounding Game).


Minigame: Doubles (pairs) Go where players cannot give each other hints and take turns playing as the same color. Source: Hikaru no Go. There is also a video from an NHK tournament of a Pairs game.

One of my favorite aspects of Hikaru no Go is the Heian period's clothing fashion of the noble's ghost Fujiwara-no-Sai. Sai wears a long sleeved shirt/tunic with two layers. The outside layer has a gap around the shoulders. Those gaps probably provide adequate ventilation for warm seasons like summer and Spring while the long sleeves provide warmth in the Autumn and Winter, maybe even in the snow like in the series. Sai also wears white shoes or thick socks that have a separate big toe. Years ago I remember reading on Wikipedia about construction workers in Japan wearing boots with separate big toes for extra dexterity/balance. The article was probably about toeshoes. I have tried wearing individual-toe-shoes and also toeshoes that group the pinky and 2nd smallest toe together, which is more convenient. Individual-toe-socks are a little tight and can affect the sizing of the shoes. I suppose the main reason I stopped wearing toeshoes was because I accidentally shrunk them in the dryer. However, I do wear Hatsune Miku style sleeves that are similar to Sai's outfit, but without the inner layer, though sometimes I also wear a thin inner layer as well. Hikaru himself sometimes wears a hoodie with short sleeves, which I do as well. The tank top hoodie is becoming more popular in SF now that it is Spring, but only a few months ago it was a style that I had only seen in anime and donghua (Chinese animation).


Probably another reason that Go boards are traditionally made of wood is that ceramic breaks easily and into shards. Go stones can be chipped (Source: Hikaru no Go, especially if they are glass I suppose, However, I think the small round shape of the stones would make them less likely to break than an entire glass board. There is an ancient painting shown in the Surrounding Game of a man in Samurai armor knocking over a Go board in anger. John Nash also knocked over a Go Board by accident after he lost and left in A Beautiful Mind and didn't even bother to pick up the stones either even though he lost the bet to do the laundry. "Ragequitting" is a term common in video gaming and controllers are somewhat delicate.


However, according to the "Survivor Bias" video by Veritasium, traditional buildings like the ones in Korea may look that way and have superior architecture perhaps just because they are the only buildings from the past that have survived this long. Therefore, perhaps Go boards were not all wood in the past, but only the wooden ones survived.


Wang Gu Xian Qiong (Everlasting Immortal Firmament) is the controversial donghua that references Go probably the most out of the 50 something donghua with English subtitles.


https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=140-R-XShFc&list=TLPQMjEwMzIwMjB-hgAWaAz5Ow&index=5
Game possibility tree


One of the four noble things was playing guqin (古琴). According to Prof. Kumiko Uyeda, Confucius hated the Se, the larger predecessor of the guzheng (古筝). If I had to guess why Confucius hated the Se, besides the typical skepticism of new technology and also the idea that the guzheng is from the ethnic minority rather than the Han majority, I would guess that it is because guzhengs are usually tuned to play a major pentatonic scale. Major scales are almost always used in national anthems, which can be thought of as war songs and prideful. The game of Go is indeed a war game, but it also focuses on accepting one's own loss, which national anthems rarely do. However, I do not think that Confucius would necessarily hate the newer instrument, the 扬琴 (yangqin), as it shares the same chracter qin for zither (though the guzheng is also a zither) and the character gu 古 in both guzheng and guqin simply means ancient and doesn't necessarily mean that they are more similar than a yangqin and guqin.
The yangqin is tuned with strings for all 12 chromatic notes, and the guqin icmalso makes it easy to play in a chromatic scale because the strings are unbridged and the pitch is controlled by pressing down on the strings with fingers. The yangqin can play both minor and major scales without being retuned, similar to a guqin. A guzheng (such as the one in the 25-string guzheng youtube song) could also be retuned to play all 7 European notes which includes both apentatonic major and minor scales. In a similar way that a Go board has many possibilities, a guqin also has infitely many notes going beyond the precision of 12 notes and could even play a 24 note key, though it would require close listening.


Go in the Tale of Genji translated by Dennis Washburn, pages found using Amazon Kindle: 
(By searching "playing go"):
Page 55
Page 144
210
211 "weren't able to play Go today.' Murasaki was still lying facedown...'
Footnote explained on Page 389 "Murasaki is alluding to a Chinese legend about a young woodcutter, Wang Chih, who encounters immortals playing Go...", actual footnote on Murasaki's quote on page 379. 
498	
695
915
930 "play on words associated with Go (e.g. kazoeru 'to count [territory],' makeru, 'to lose/be defeated,'
1057 "challenged Kaoru to a match..."
1143
1285

Now searching "go board":
55
62
91
346
910
1057 Kaoru
1286 "... he fancied himself as the High Priest of the Go Board, as if he were the equal of Tachibana Yoshitoshi himself! [he in this quote is not necessarily Kaoru]"
1308 (a little more than the previous search yielded) "His formal name as a master of Go was Kanren, but he was also given the sobriquet, High Priest of the Go Board (Kisei Daitoku)"
According to Hikaru no Go's Let's Play Go, the "the oldest title in Japan is Hon'inbo" not even Kisei, so therefore the Hon'inbo title must be even older than the Tale of Genji, 3000 year old book, and Go also existed in China before Japan.


According to a webpage something like SparkNotes.com or another site I cannot remember, Murasaki Shikibu, the author of the Tale of Genji (Genji Monogatori), was named in post after her death after the characters Murasaki and Shikibu in the book. Her real name was forgotten and "her similarity to the characters is unknown." I had not realized the connection between the author's name and the characters. There is also perhaps a connection with Genji's original name, Prince Hikaru, and Hikaru in Hikaru no Go, who meets a ghost also from the Heian period. The Tale of Genji also has supernatural events, too;


Starcraft is another game dominated by Korea. After mastering Go, DeepMind moved on to Starcraft, but did not yet teach the agents the Art of Resigning in Starcraft, and as a result, Mana said "such manners" when AlphaStar did not GG (Good Game/resign) when losing and perhaps the agents lacked Junzi and a potential skill for them to save time training. Also, the "most bizarre game" AlphaStar played with Mana was similar to the territorial and "resource efficient" (quote: The Art of War documentary) game of Go, because an AlphaStar agent tried to steal  the player Mana's natural gas and also set up a supply depot building in the middle of Mana's starting base. AlphaStar also focused heavily on economy building rather then using their workers to fight. It was probably coincidence that AlphaStar and AlphaGo played in similar ways, though.


The Art of Resignation may also be used by the disease solving game by resetting the puzzle fully. 


Note: Onegaishimasu means "please" in Disastrous Life of Saiki K. ep. 16 13:10




Note: I think of liberties in Go as spaces for social distancing and agriculture which are necessary during epidemics that often arise during war. For example, according to a Genghis Khan video on Youtube, one city that Genghis Khan seiged fell to an epidemic. Later on, while Genghis Khan seiged another city, his Mongol troops' camp experienced an epidemic of their own, so they made somewhat of a truce.


Another similarity Go has with epidemics is that the stones form chains, similar to sidechains on a protein backbone, which can be designed to bind to viruses. Some sidechains such as tryptophan (an amino acid in pumpkins) also have hexagon or pentagon shaped holes that look similar to the simple eye shapes in Go. Tryptophan in particular has two eyes, one hexagon and one adjacent pentagon. Having two eyes is necessary for defense in Go. Tryptophan is also a large sidechain that fills voids for points in the game Foldit. Similarly, having large eyes in Go such as an L shape (which is not a false eye according to the New York Go School on Youtube) is beneficial because it scores territory points.


In the Internet Go game on FlyOrDie.com/go , black is stylized as fire (火) and white is stylized as ice (冰/bing1, though maybe it would be more currently relevant in San Francisco as 病/bing4/sickness). Black might appear irrelevant to fire using an English vocabulary mindset but in Chinese, the word black/黑, has the fire radical on the bottom 灬 . As Laoshi Wenchi Chang explained, black has the fire radical to show its meaning because fire burns things and chars them black. Perhaps part of the reason that black goes first in Go is that the philosopher Mozi/墨子 has the super-radical (as opposed to sub-radical, a term I might be making up) 黑/black in his surname. 墨家/Mojia, his philosophy, was not as widespread as Confucianism, Daoism, or Legalism (Qin and Han dynasties), but Mozi was a carpenter and emphasised the value of precision, and built catapults for self defense. Therefore, the carpentry aspect of Mohism could be connected to the wooden Go boards, and the self-defense seige-engines could be connected to the Encirclement Game. Go is also about creating as well. Similar to the game Starcraft, Go involves creating "bases" (Source: Wikipedia). Therefore, the construction aspect of playing the game can be related to Mohism. 

