cat > capstoneDraft.txt                            despite my roommate constantly accusing me of stealing forks, confucists would not use forks often and certainly would not use knives for food, only for opening boxes. Confucius also said "gentlemen should only compete in archery, and bow to each other afterwards." -Qin's Moon 天行九歌 spinoff
"tronome/index.html |  2 +-                         2 files changed, 20 insertions(+), 1 deletion(-)     create mode 100644 keyChecker.html                  $ cat > capstoneDraft.txt                                                                                 The only song Mozi 墨子) would pay for is Scary Monsters and Nice Sprites (and similar songs if they had the same mosquito repellent effect).                  He would also use archive.org and NCS (NoCopyrightSounds).^C                                              $ cat > capstoneDraft.txt                            The only song Mozi 墨子) would pay for is Scary Monsters and Nice Sprites (and similar songs if they had the same mosquito repellent effect).                  He would also use archive.org and NCS (NoCopyrightSounds).^C                                              $ cat > capstoneDraft.txt                                                                                 cat > capstoneDraft.txt                            The only song Mozi 墨子) would pay for is Scary Monsters and Nice Sprites (and similar songs if they had the same mosquito repellent effect).                  He would also use archive.org and NCS (NoCopyrightSounds).                                                  ^C                                                   $ cat > capstoneDraft.txt                            One of my fears is becoming too much like a weeaboo (though the technical definition of otaku in Japanese and not American slang is not great either).         ^C                                                   $ cat > capstoneDraft.txt                            despite my roommate constantly accusing me of stealing forks, confucists would not use forks often and certainly would not use knives for food, only for opening boxes. Confucius also said "gentlemen should only compete in archery, and bow to each other afterwards." -Qin's Moon 天行九歌 spinoff                        ^C                                                   $ git add *                                          $ git commit -m "c"                                  [master c2ace66] c                                    1 file changed, 1 insertion(+), 5 deletions(-)       rewrite capstoneDraft.txt (100%)                    $ git push                                           Username for 'https://github.com': zoeweinberg       Password for 'https://zoeweinberg@github.com':       Enumerating objects: 5, done.                        Counting objects: 100% (5/5), done.                  Delta compression using up to 4 threads              Compressing objects: 100%"

It just so happens we live next to an archery field, but he does not even want to play the Weiqi game he has on Christmas even though in Spring 2019 he askeed me to teach him. But I did beat him in Super Smash Bros. despite being more out of practice then a girl in ACV.
"note to self use cat>> and not just cat> which overrwrites instead of concatenating.
but my overwritten text (and in khmerRougeRoughDraft.txt) should still be in commit history

Confucius answered a question saying a state needs confidence more than food, and food more than military. Out of the 3, military should be disposed of first if one had to choose.

Han Fei (a Legalist inspired by Confucianism) said his teacher said men are inherently selfish and cannot be restricted without law (法, fǎ). Source: QM 9 Songs.
Wikipedia said although Han Fei incorporated Confucianism he still used "rule of law" and thus Confucius' vision of a rule without law was never reached. but Prof. Menkus' class said Confucius wanted to restore the Tang Dynasty, so there was probably rule without law at some point. By rule without law, that probably means a ruler without rules, only ritual guidelines.
The TA in Prof. Menkus' class also advised for me that I rewrite my Human Rights essay on the one Asian film we learned about. That was probably helpful in the long run.
Praise be to Ganesha god of education that I had downloaded all the course files before the Global Human Rights class Canvas page went offline.


In the live action (L.A.) Untamed MDZS, the donkey  Apple (小苹果） kicked the dog Fairy for biting him.
In the old spinoff movie Qin's Moon: Something Robot, there was a Qin general named General Fruit, and at first he was a villain but later he saved lives. Fruit as in 水果. Needless to say he was good at Fruit Ninja.
The word ninja is relatively recent and has a more brutal meaning than shinobi. source: the last ninja explaining Naruto.
I have not written anything formal in Japanese I will try writing "mushin no shin".

I have not slept all day since 24 hours ago when I woke up to try to be a relational person like Kongzi.
Prajna (pragna, knowledge wisdom) yoga
Karma (action, including stretching but also war like Krishna instructed to Arjuna) yoga
One more yoga

catPush.sh                                       Prajna (pragna, knowledge wisdom) yoga               Karma (action, including stretching but also war like Krishna instructed to Arjuna) yoga                  One more yoga

Maybe Confucius thought the se (like the guzheng) was evil because it is louder and higher pitched than a guqin so it would likely give you blisters from the taut thin strings, even if silk. I tried playing a koto, however, in Prof. Udeya Kimiko's class, which is similarly shaped and ranged like a guzheng, but I think it was a little quieter and deeper, certainly in the song Rokudan. I think I did also try playing a guzheng in the event, but only Mary Had a Little Lamb, not something like Fisherman's Song of the Evening, which would be good to have artificial nails.
The bandurria strings did give me blisters but theyy weren't as bad as blisters from a guitar (I think) maybe because the high pitched strings on a bandurria have multiple copies for tremelo, so it is like resting on a comfortable bed of nails rather than just one. I did rest on a bed of nails in a science museum and also stepped into a needle so I know for sure.

My vision is or was so bad I could not tell gender. Everyone was literally just a 他.

眼镜 is glasses. Japanese uses the traditional form instead.

Doaists that take shortcuts and the easy way ewould say in response to George Berkeley's transcendalist philosophy, "if a light is on in a room and no one is around do see it, does it waste energy? The answer is no, because the light converts to heat." Confucius would say, "my father did not leave the light on. I do not know what you are talking about." 
Mozi was a carpenter. I remembered when I received my wooden mug that smells pleasantly like bamboo shoots. My Chinese 101 classmate was right that bamboo shoots smell like wood.


The word cup 杯子 has the wood radical. Hence, after stepping on a ceramic shard splinter (despite wearing sandals it got over them) I bought a wooden mug. Mozi full name Mo Di was a carpenter. Indigenous Filipinos walked barefoot. I had walked barefoot a little around the dorms to prepare for the constant fire evacuations. I will walk barefoot again in my apartment because it is probably safer in this situation, although cold.

Mozi would say leaving the light on would benefit neighbors on the srd
on the street by acting as a streetlight, in the motto of 仁爱, universal love (though more aptly named respect).
But of course, I am pushing my own view onto them. For example, people used to quote the poet Lung Xun as well as his admirer Mao Zedong all the time in 20th century China because it was always necessary to nmakre a point that was accepted, even if Lun Xung did not day those things. Source: the optional textbook for Chinese Lit. Fall 2019, "China in 10 words", print.


It is good to floss, but realistically, no one does, perhaps because it is painful for gums and causes bleeding, and floss picks can damage the surrounding mouth as well. In China, almost all restuarants I went to in Beijing and Hangzhou gave out toothpicks, specifically one sided toothpicks. Elaine Yi explained to me that people in China used toothpicks because they have not yet adopted floss. However, I think toothpicks are safer, especially one sided toothpicks which can easily be carried in a pocket without peircing fabric and getting stuck. The one sided toothpicks in my apartment are Korean, though they are sharper.


XiaoYu 小feather in Stellar Transformations also wore a tank top hoodie as the Silver Assassin in white for the group Skynet.


However, XiaoYu mostly wore the hood to conceal his identity. He wore nothing but a tank top armor and arm sleeve bracers during his training/cultivation, even when lying down on the cold stone floor outside in the snow. (Season 1 finale). Hopefully if I stop wearing my hoodie for a while, my skin irritation will go away.

Note: when using cat>> in a bash script to write this then push it to git, press Ctrl D to save but not quit the script.

Strong yin flows into strong yang, like fish cheasing the others tails in a circle faster and faster. The people that like me the most end up hating me the most.

Sobriety leads to drunkenness like Lan Zhan in the Live action Untamed.


There is an anime that describes the painful process of buying glasses (买眼镜). It is exaggerated but in real life up until this year with the application of noncontrasted MRI technology, the puffs of air in my eyes and yellow dialation were painful, just to create an image of my eyes.

Of contrastedness, but immaterial contrast, there was a talk at USF that explained the importance of contrastiveness in language, both in English and Chinese though in different ways if not phonetic in both. I also like to use Mohist precision when I write, which is why I prefer to use the words "ought" and "probablly" instead of the ambiguous word "should" unless I specifically want (which in Shakespeare meant lack) a double meaning. I also probably intentionally misprponounce the word Mohism so that people know how to spell it, like how Prof. Robert Kim (the Robert Kim at USF not my highschool) explained that UC Berkeley intentionally mispronounces George Berkeley's name. Having precision is important for SEO.


One of the Ten Words to describe China in the book is "bamboozle". In here and also China, there are posters advertising glasses, with models wearing the glasses. When I try on the glasses, I see myself in the mirror with no distortion as well, because they are just the frames (even though ready made prescription glasses can be found online), and I look just like the undistorted models on the poster, but when the lenses are made, I look like a monster 怪物，鬼). Bamboozle means trickery in a sense.


In China (specifically a mall in Beijing) they sell wooden combs.


As the 5th or 6th season of Battle Through H said, "我讨厌这个沙漠！＂ because it is too dry.

