     What should the Khmer Rouge's mass killing be called?
     As an outsider, I am hesitant to write much. My grandfather was in a similar holocaust (in which both his parents seemingly died in 1944) but I am not Asian nor am I qualified to talk about human rights. There are some differences and similarities between the more recent Cambodian holocaust and others. Genetics may not have been a huge target but babies and children were killed by the man with the alias Duch, particularly at one detainment center (Renée, p. 37 top).
     Although most people killed by the Khmer Rouge were not killed by genocide, the Khmer Rouge killed 1.5 million to 2 million people, as opposed to the Rwandan genocide of Tutsis and moderate Hutus totalling 500,000 to 1,070,000 people. The Khmer Rouge killed just over 20% (one in five) of the population of their own Cambodia, reaching more deaths than a legitimate or technical genocide. (Wikipedia: Rwandan Genocide and Khmer Rouge Quick Facts). An argument could be made that the Buddhist monastics in Cambodia were specifically targeted to do the most back-breaking labor, so that was an act of genocide. We will never know if the Khmer Rouge would have forbidden the monks from having children because non-Zen Buddhist monks do not have children while they are monks. Our female classmate also mentioned that Muslims in Cambodia were targeted. Since most Cambodians were Lay Buddhist, targeting Muslims is a more fitting case of "genocide".
     I have an old friend whose parents were under Pol Pot's regime. I do not want to offend him, but I also do not want to bother him by asking questions. I know that he was Buddhist and practiced acceptance.
     Although not calling it a genocide would seem to soften the harshness of it, a genocide could merely imply kidnapping children away from their culture, such as the Aboriginal children in Australia or potentially a more benevolent case of rescuing girls from female genital mutilation in Senegal. I happen to also have a female friend whose parents were from Senegal, but even her I do not know well enough to ask those kinds of questions, and some information should probably not be shared beyond two people anyways. But even if a so-called "genocide" of kidnapping to prevent unwilling circumcision was perpetrated against my own culture of Judaism, I would be happy, because you can always be reunited with your family, but you can never regain your sexual identity, also in some Muslim places (besides the Philippines where male circumcision is more or less consensual) and Christian places mainly in the USA. Genocide is still not good because it intends to eradicate a culture or ethnic group or even race, but I think the word "holocaust" actually has a much deeper ring to it, particularly because we usually use the word capitalized or even in lowercase to mean the Holocaust against Jews and other minorities in Nazi Germany and around Europe during the 1940s. We have not yet really applied the word holocaust to any specific incidence besides the one my grandfather was in.
     Watching the film for the second time, I realized that there was a vicious dog in one scene when the Vietnamese attack the Khmer Rouge adult soldiers. I do not know which side the dog belonged to. It was growling and barking but it was not depicted biting anyone. Maybe it was for sniffing bombs such as landmines and tripwires.
     In the beginning of the film, Loung dreamt of the Monkey King taking a stand against the Khmer Rouge soldiers taking over the capital, Phnom Penh. The monkey king is a somewhat universal character as in Chinese mythology and as the Hindu monkey god Hanuman. In Chinese mythology, the monkey king likes to fight but not to hurt, and is Buddhist. The universal icon might be showing a universalist approach to human rights.
     After being bitten by a dog next to a daycare, I am less hesitant to believe the dog in the movie belonged to the Vietnamese and not simply the Khmer Rouge. If so, all sides could have been intimidating, especially to a little girl like Luong Ung.
     From doing a little of my own research, I found out that the slang word Khmai refers to khmer people (of Cambodian descent), and from the movie's subtitles we see that khmer can also refer to the khmer language. I think in class you said that Angkar refers to Cambodia as a whole but from looking at Wikipedia, Angkar refers to the Communist CPK movement (AKA the Khmer Rouge) in Cambodia, which was called at that time the Republic of Kampuchea. This explanation seemed to make more sense to me as a definition.
     I have not written much yet but I would probably conclude that the Khmer Rouge's killing of nearly millions of people ought to be called a holocaust. This will also help people realize that mass killing does not even need racial hate as a precursor and that we have failed to complete the slogan "Never Again" when it comes to holocausts. Given the situation that happened recently with an on-campus USF student, we must be careful.
Notes:
What should the Khmer Rouge's killing of 1.5 million of their fellow Cambodians be called?
A: a holocaust, though technically not genocide
Pol Pot
Angkar
The definition of a holocaust can be a mass killing especially by fire (duck.com). People were not mass incinerated by flames alone in Cambodia but there were landmines which are arguably even more indiscriminate than fire, which is temporary. Although genocidal holocausts and discrimination is bad, the opposite, such as killing one's own extended family members and indiscriminate killing, can be just as bad if not worse, certainly according to Confucianism but maybe even Buddhism as well, which does not say making 300 pandas go extinct is worse than killing a thousand elephants. People tend to look after their family and their nation, so when kids report their own family such as under Maoism, or 25% of a country's population was wiped out by its own people, something has gone very wrong. According to the film Nuremberg, Tyranny on Trial, the Nazis said there was a "space" problem, however, there is also outer space. Perhaps one of the reasons the Cold War died down was because of the Space Race which ironically led to space exploration, perhaps bringing hope of peace back to us down on Earth where unfortunately humans have reached almost maximum capacity: 36% of the biomass of all land mammals is humans, 60% is livestock, and only 4 percent is wildlife mammals. We do not like to think this way, and enjoy watching wildlife documentaries, but the reality when we walk outside for real is that most of us humans now live in urban concrete jungles. My point is that militaries ought to be making space exploration and space colonization rockets rather than explosive rockets (unless they are used to deflect asteroids) and need to stop neocolonialization of countries that are already inhabited with life. The problem though, is that if a military or government did stop making weapons (although the Khmer Rouge had weapons come in from China and Vietnam), that entity would no longer be considered a military or even a government, which would have "the monopoly over the use of force [violence] in a region," even if it was considered legitimate by the UN. Therefore, both Lon Nol, which was backed by Nixon's America, and the Khmer Rouge, failed to maintain the people's trust in the long run, and the only leaders that survived en masse were the pacifist monks. There are still some leaders charged with war crimes who have not been found guilty by judges in Cambodia, but those were the lucky few to escape with their lives first near the border by Thailand while retreating and then afterwards survive basically by bribing judges. Most people cannot survive such a deadly and competitive game. 
From watching First They Killed My Father the first time, for some reason I misremembered one of the monks at the end as wearing glasses, like the Dalai Lama of Tibet, but from rewatching the film, I saw for sure that none of the monks wore glasses and I think none of Luong's family did either. Glasses are an expensive luxury, and from reading Wikipedia's plot synopsis, it seems like the Buddhist shrine was not already in ruins before the Khmer Rouge but only afterwards, although it may have been bombed by the USA as well. I had thought of temples as normally being ruins like Ancient Greek amphitheaters, but when I went to Beijing, the Daoist temple there, Tantian, had been well restored. Now I realize from rewatching the film and seeing the lack of luxurious apparel (although there was unique colored clothing in the end) and from reading the plot, the Khmer Rouge had a huge impact on Cambodia, on its people, descendents, building structures, and prpbably spirituality as well. One of the readings said that the legal system was still in recovery, too, from corruption, although in theory the Khmer Rouge was fighting corruption and illiteracy, it was mostly just fighting.
     Luong Ung's father, called Pa, may have able to cook rice grains on a pan without water because fresh rice (according to a webpage about puffed rice) still has some water in it, although as far as I know and from my experiences, I can only puff rice that has been cooked and then dried out if it is either subsequently fried in oil or if it is microwaved like popcorn. I imagine that cooking rice with water inside the grains on a pan would still leave the grains a little burnt, despite the water which stops the slightly carcinogenic roasting chemical from forming, unless fresh rice was as moist and soft as dumplings. I have never seen fresh rice fields except from airplanes and trains so I would not know.
     What's the point of graduating if I simply become a target in the next revolution that hates educated people?
The khmer rouge called monks parasites that suck the life blood of the people, but a rabbi actually did suck my blood and it is common.
     music in major key to brainwash kids
