Australian Journal of International Affairs, 2015
Vol. 69, No. 1, 35–52, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10357718.2014.939140

The forgiveness dilemma: emotions and justice at the
Khmer Rouge tribunal
RENÉE JEFFERY*
In post-conflict politics, forgiveness is as controversial as it is popular.
Generally conceived as the overcoming of negative moral emotions such as
resentment and anger, forgiveness is, on the one hand, credited with
bestowing significant psychological benefits on its practitioners, contributing
to processes of interpersonal and societal reconciliation, and avoiding
revenge. On the other hand, however, critics warn that rather than helping
to address the negative emotions, forgiveness actually helps to provoke
resentments and grievances by heaping injustice upon injustice. Herein lies
the dilemma with which this article is concerned. By examining the nature of
the negative emotions and their relationship to the pursuit of justice, as well
as the nature and consequences of forgiveness, it considers the role that
victim participation in human rights trials plays in helping post-conflict
societies to overcome the forgiveness dilemma. To do so, it focuses on Case
001, heard before the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia.
Keywords: Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia; forgiveness;
transitional justice

In post-conflict politics, the practice of forgiveness is marked by a serious
dilemma. For its proponents, forgiveness is the panacea for entrenched anger and
resentment—negative moral emotions that, left unchecked, inspire revenge,
hamper efforts at reconciliation, jeopardise prospects for both peace and personal
well-being, and ultimately contribute to the redescent into violence in the postconflict period (Shriver 2003, 31; Tutu 1999). Supporters thus variously argue
that forgiveness allows antagonists to move ‘beyond sterile situations of mutual
condemnation’, halts never-ending cycles of revenge, and bestows therapeutic
benefits upon the victims of serious wrongs, including human rights violations
(Bole, Christiansen, and Hennemeyer 2004, 76; Arendt 1998, 240). At the same
time, however, critics challenge the true therapeutic benefits of forgiveness (Lamb
2005), and question the notion that negative emotions such as anger and
resentment ought to be overcome (Brudholm 2008; Lamb and Murphy 2002).
They point to the disappointment and anguish felt by victims of human rights
*Renée Jeffery, School of International, Political and Strategic Studies, Hedley Bull Centre,
Australian National University. <renee.jeffery@anu.edu.au>
© 2014 Australian Institute of International Affairs

36

Renée Jeffery

violations when forgiveness practices fail to heal the wounds of the past, when
official forgiveness processes subjugate their right to choose whether or not to
forgive, and when perpetrators appear to get off scot-free (Boraine 2000, 147).
Critics thus argue that rather than helping to address the negative emotions,
forgiveness actually helps to provoke resentments and grievances by heaping hurt
upon hurt, and injustice, perceived or otherwise, upon injustice. Herein lies the
forgiveness dilemma: in post-conflict politics, forgiveness is both an antidote to
the negative emotions and one of their key precipitants.
Focusing on the case of Cambodia, this article examines a set of key questions
emanating from the forgiveness dilemma in post-conflict politics: How can postconflict states acknowledge the legitimacy of the negative emotions without
permitting them to be manifested in revenge? How can victims and survivors of
serious harms be afforded the opportunity to overcome the negative emotions
without mandating they do so? And how can the negative emotions be redressed
in ways that are predicated neither on the requirement to forgive nor on the
relinquishment of justice? That is, how can the sorts of dark emotions that are
inspired by the infliction of serious harms, including grievous violations of
human rights, be addressed in ways that avoid both revenge and renewed
resentments?
For Martha Minow (1998) and others, truth commissions provide an obvious
way of forging a path between vengeance and forgiveness. As in the case of the
South African Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC), they are viewed as
a ‘third way’—a compromise between the competing demands of impunity,
forgiveness and reconciliation, on the one hand, and accountability, on the other
(Boraine 2000; Chapman 2001, 258; Jeffery and Kim 2014, 14; Minow 1998,
241; Tutu 1999, 30). With the rise in truth commissions in the late 1990s and
early 2000s, it seems that many post-conflict states are choosing this option,
with increasing numbers of scholars focusing their efforts on assessing the
successes and failures of the ‘third way’ (Biggar 2003a; Brudholm 2008; Jeffery
2013, 2014a). Yet, truth commissions do not provide the only solution to the
forgiveness dilemma. Rather than treading that well-beaten path, this article
thus examines another approach to the forgiveness dilemma: victim participation in human rights trials.
This article argues that the solution to the forgiveness dilemma is to be found
by considering the nature of the negative emotions themselves. In doing so, it
diverges from existing accounts that have sought a resolution to the forgiveness
dilemma in the achievement of a workable compromise between impunity and
accountability. As an increasing body of literature has recognised in recent
years, the much maligned negative emotions play an essential role in making
moral judgments and driving the pursuit of justice (Damasio 1994; Greene
2008; Jeffery 2011a, 2014b; Solomon 1995). This article thus suggests that
rather than relinquishing claims to justice in a bid to overcome the negative
emotions, forging a path between forgiveness and revenge means finding ways
to channel the emotional drive to justice into constructive justice practices—that

The forgiveness dilemma

37

is, it means finding ways to allow resentment and anger to drive justice
processes without descending into the ‘wild justice’ of revenge (Bacon 1937).
In order to do so, this article focuses on debates about forgiveness which took
place during Case 001—that of Kaing Guek Eav (alias Duch)—heard by the
Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia (ECCC), the first hybrid
human rights tribunal to allow victims to ‘[p]articipate in criminal proceedings
against those responsible for crimes within the jurisdiction of the ECCC by
supporting the prosecution’ (Internal Rules 2011, 23[1]). What makes the Duch
trial particularly appropriate to this task is that, despite the desperate pleas of
the accused and ample opportunities to forgive, the victims who participated in
the case as civil parties consistently chose not to grant forgiveness. Rather than
holding on to their anger and resentment, or allowing it to manifest in the
pursuit of revenge, however, for the most part these individuals not only sought,
but actually achieved the elimination or diminution of their negative emotions—
that is, they simultaneously rejected the idea that forgiveness is necessary for
overcoming the negative emotions and the suggestion that letting go of anger
and resentment entails relinquishing the pursuit of justice. Drawing on extensive
analysis of court documents, testimonies heard before the Trial Chamber, and
original and publicly available interviews with the civil parties and their lawyers
and representatives, this article concludes that allowing victims to participate in
formal justice processes may be one way of addressing the negative moral
emotions without requiring forgiveness or risking revenge.
Begging forgiveness at the ECCC
Led by the notorious genocidaire Pol Pot, between April 17, 1975 and January
6, 1979, the Khmer Rouge systematically murdered at least 1.7 million people—
just over 20 percent of the population of Cambodia—and subjected countless
others to ‘torture, arbitrary imprisonment, forced separation of families, and the
denial of the most basic freedoms’ (Ciorciari 2006, 11–12). Save for a few
highly questionable attempts at justice, such as the three-day trial and death
sentence passed on Pol Pot and his deputy prime minister and foreign minister,
Ieng Sary, in absentia in 1979, these crimes were left without adequate redress
for more than 25 years. In 2006, however, the ECCC came into operation,
carrying with it the hopes of many Cambodians and, indeed, members of the
international community that those responsible for one of the worst humanitarian atrocities of the twentieth century would finally be held to account for
their actions.
The first case heard before the ECCC was that of Kaing Guek Eav, the
chairman of Toul Sleng Prison, also known as S-21. As revealed by the court’s
investigations and testimonies provided both by witnesses and the defendant,
S-21 was ‘a security center tasked with interrogating and executing perceived
opponents of the [Communist Party of Kampuchea or CPK] from 1975 to 1979’
(Jeffery 2014c, 107; Judgment 2010, 2.3.111). Its main purpose was ‘to extract

38

Renée Jeffery

confessions from prisoners in order to uncover further networks of possible
traitors’ (Judgment 2010, 2.3.3.5.2) by using various forms of torture including
‘beating, electrocution, asphyxiation with a plastic bag and “water-boarding”’
(Judgment 2010, 2.4.4.1.1). It is estimated that 17,000 individuals, including
young children and babies, were imprisoned and killed at S-21 and its associated
execution site. For this reason, David Chandler has termed S-21 ‘an anteroom
to death’ (Chandler 1999, 15), where ‘[e]very individual ... was destined for
execution’ (Judgment 2010, 2.3.3.5). There were only seven known survivors.
More than 30 years later, S-21 would become the site at which forgiveness
became a notable theme of Duch’s trial. During the investigation phase, the
accused agreed to visit S-21 for the purposes of reconstructing events. There he
met with three of the seven S-21 survivors and, in a surprising turn of events,
asked for their forgiveness. ‘I ask for your forgiveness—I know that you cannot
forgive me, but I ask that you leave me in the hope that you might’, he said,
before collapsing into tears on the shoulder of one of his guards (quoted in Bizot
2009). Statements such as this, as well as expressions of sorrow, remorse and
regret, would later mark the lengthy trial.
In his opening statement on day two of his trial, Duch expressed his
‘regretfulness and heartfelt sorrow and loss for all the crimes committed by
the CPK’, before turning to the victims and their families to offer an apology
and to signal that he wished to ask for forgiveness:
I would like those people to please know that I would like to apologise, and I
would like you to consider my intention that I have not asked [you] to
forgive me now, but I am attempting to do so later. I know for sure that my
crimes committed on people, including children and women in particular,
are the serious crimes that cannot be tolerated. So my current plea is that I
would like you to please leave open a window for me to seek forgiveness
(Testimony, Day Two, 68).

Later on the same day, Duch explained that he had been so ‘shocked’ and
‘heartbroken’ when he realised the extent of the crimes committed against the
people of Cambodia that he was unable to work or even leave the house.
The ‘remedy to make me feel relief’, he stated, was ‘to pray and apologise to the
victims’, and to initiate a tradition of praying ‘for the forgiveness for the whole
nation, of all the people who died’ on November 17 each year (Testimony, Day
Two, 71–72). In addition to his frequent expressions of remorse and requests
for forgiveness, Duch’s actions in court were also significant. Bowing his head
before the victims and civil parties seated in the public gallery, his hands held
together in the prayer position, he silently pleaded with them for forgiveness
and, as some of the civil parties interpreted it, for acceptance and reconciliation.
Duch’s verbal and physical pleas sparked significant debates among the
victims, their representatives and other interested parties about the appropriateness of forgiving an individual accused of such heinous crimes. The victims

The forgiveness dilemma

39

questioned whether Duch’s actions were simply unforgivable; debated what
forgiveness would actually entail in this context; considered its therapeutic
benefits and harms; puzzled over the role that apologies and expressions of
remorse play in fomenting forgiveness; and considered whether righteous anger
and resentment ought to be overcome in the face of such manifest injustice. In
the closing stages of the trial and months that followed, Duch’s last-minute
decision to change his plea to ‘not guilty’, as well as his attempt to appeal the
Trial Chamber’s verdict and sentence, also led many to doubt the sincerity of his
remonstrations. In short, the discussions that took place throughout Case 001
echoed broader scholarly arguments about the nature of forgiveness; its
justifications, requirements and constitutive actions; and the ethics of forgiving
seemingly unforgivable crimes.

Forgiveness
The practice of forgiveness exists in both restrictive and expansive forms, both
of which are fundamentally concerned with overcoming the negative emotions,
especially anger and resentment. In its restrictive form, forgiveness simply
requires individuals to overcome the dark emotions, while, in its expansive
form, it mandates the replacing of negative emotions with positive ones directed
towards the perpetrator of the wrong in question.
Restrictive forms of forgiveness
In its first and most common restrictive form, forgiveness is conceived as ‘a
process of overcoming attitudes of resentment and anger that may persist
when one has been injured by wrongdoing’ (Govier 2002, viii; Hampton 1998,
54–55). While some writers include a number of other emotions alongside
resentment in this context, including ‘bitterness, hatred, hostility, residual anger,
and residual fear’ (Worthington 2001, 173), forgiveness is predominantly
associated with resentment and, to a lesser extent, anger (Murphy 2003, 15).
This understanding of forgiveness is most commonly attributed to the
eighteenth-century cleric Bishop Joseph Butler, who proposed that resentment
exists in two forms. ‘[H]asty and sudden resentment’ is that which is ‘generally
(and naturally) the result of sudden hurt or violence’ (Butler 1827, 5;
Newberry 2001, 234). It is an immediate instinctual response, which serves
to protect us from injury (Butler 1827, 5). By contrast, ‘settled and deliberate
resentment’ brings with it a negative judgment directed towards those
responsible for inflicting harm on ourselves or others (Butler 1827, 7). When
permitted to exist in excess, Butler argued, this second form of resentment
tends towards revenge. Thus, for Butler, the very point of forgiveness is not the
foreswearing of all resentment, but rather the overcoming of deliberate, settled
resentment, and, for this reason, he defined forgiveness as both the overcoming

40

Renée Jeffery

of resentment and ‘the checking of revenge, or forbearance’ (Newberry
2001, 233).
In its second restrictive form, forgiveness is conceived as the counterpoint to
revenge. Understood in this way, forgiveness requires the suppression of both
emotions of disapprobation and the avenging actions that may result from them—
that is, the practice of forgiveness entails a motivational change in the victim of a
wrong, from desiring or even seeking revenge against a transgressor to specifically
avoiding the pursuit of revenge. Forgiveness thus demands forbearance, ‘tolerance
and restraint in the face of provocation’ to exact revenge upon one who has
unjustly harmed us (Bole, Christiansen, and Hennemeyer 2004, 41). In this way, it
is conceived as the ‘exact opposite of vengeance’ (Arendt 1998, 240).
In restrictive contexts, proponents of forgiveness rely on two main arguments.
First, both secular and religious supporters of forgiveness maintain that ‘the
emotions that prompt acts of vengeance are themselves wrong, that anger,
resentment, vindictiveness, and hatred are undesirable and unbefitting for good
character [conceived in secular or religious terms] or psychological well-being’
(Hall 2008, 157). Focusing, for example, on the psychological impact of the
negative emotions, Baumeister, Exline, and Sommer (1998, 98) suggest that
embracing ‘suffering, weakness, and distress as part of one’s identity’ leads
individuals to ‘relinquish important possibilities for happiness’.
Second, proponents of forgiveness argue that where revenge potentially
commits both victims and perpetrators to iterated cycles of violent retaliation,
forgiveness ‘attempts to put an end to something that without interference could
go on endlessly’ (Arendt 1998, 241). Although revenge may need not always
generate an ongoing cycle of violence (Boehm 1987), supporters argue that
forgiveness makes it possible for transgressors and those to whom their unjust
actions are directed to escape from what Arendt (1998, 237) called the
‘predicament of irreversibility’—that is, forgiveness allows both victims and
perpetrators of a wrong a means of addressing that wrong, even where the
injustice committed cannot be undone.
An expansive understanding of forgiveness
While restrictive understandings of forgiveness require only the cessation of
negative emotions and a minimal change in behaviour (ceasing to act in a
negative manner), expansive definitions mandate the replacement of negative
emotions with positive ones and the pursuit of positive interactions with the
wrongdoer. They do not simply define forgiveness as ‘a willingness to abandon
one’s right to resentment, negative judgment, and indifferent behaviour toward
one who has unjustly injured us’, but add the positive requirements that the
victim of a wrong foster the ‘undeserved qualities of compassion, generosity,
and even love toward’ their transgressor (Enright, Freeman, and Rique 1998,
46–47). This understanding of forgiveness does not simply entail cold indifference towards one who has caused harm, but includes positive expressions of

The forgiveness dilemma

41

emotions, cognition and behaviour. By this reckoning, forgiveness requires
‘overcoming resentment and substituting compassion ... overcoming condemnation with respect and/or generosity’, and overcoming ‘indifference or the
tendency toward subtle revenge with a sense of goodwill’ (Enright, Freeman,
and Rique 1998, 47). Conceived in expansive terms, forgiveness is thus not a
passive relinquishing of the hurt and all that goes with it, or ceasing to express a
negative value judgment, but an active undertaking on the part of the forgiver
(North 1998, 20).
In its most extreme variant, forgiveness thus seeks the active re-establishment
of right relationships between victims and perpetrators of wrongs (Jeffery
2011b, 81). For this reason, it is often conceived as a practice constitutive of the
process of reconciliation, although it is not synonymous with reconciliation
(Roberts 1995, 289). Also conceived as an outcome in some contexts,
reconciliation is most commonly understood as the ‘process of addressing
conflictual and fractured relationships’ (Hamber and Kelly 2004, 3). This
process may involve a range of practices, of which forgiveness is one. Thus,
while proponents of restrictive forms of forgiveness suggest that it is possible to
forgive without reconciling (Schimmel 2004, 32), demanding accounts of
reconciliation maintain that ‘one never truly reconciles without some form of
forgiving taking place’ (Enright 2001, 31).
Forgiveness is thus concerned with overcoming negative emotions, practised
in the interests of improving the psychological outlook of the victims of wrongs,
to avoid revenge and to facilitate the building of positive relationships and
reconciliation—that is, it seeks, at a minimum, to mitigate the negative effects of
the negative emotions and, in a maximal sense, to replace them with positive
emotions and their associated actions.
The forgiveness dilemma
Despite the good ends at which it aims, however, forgiveness is not an
uncomplicated practice. Rather, it presents us with an interesting set of
dilemmas manifested in both theory and practice. First, alongside the positive
ends associated with overcoming resentment—namely, improving the psychological well-being of the victims of wrongs, avoiding revenge and facilitating
reconciliation—forgiveness often overlooks and even erases the positive functions and outcomes associated with the negative emotions—namely, identifying
injustices and motivating behaviour in response to them. This, in turn, may
provoke renewed resentments and thus undo the very work that forgiveness
aims to perform. Second, while forgiveness may be an effective means of
overcoming resentments, it can also be the source of new, equally destructive
feelings of resentment, inspired by the religious foundations of the practice, by
the sense that, in politics, forgiveness is often imposed on the victims of wrongs,
and by the notion that forgiveness grants impunity to the perpetrators of serious
crimes (Jeffery 2014d, 82–85). The second of these dilemmas focuses on the

42

Renée Jeffery

nature and outcomes of forgiveness, and, though worthy of consideration, is not
our concern here. The first centres on the very nature of the negative moral
emotions, which is the primary concern of this article.
The negative moral emotions
In theoretical terms, the forgiveness dilemma rests on a cognitive understanding
of the emotions, which, since at least the 1980s, has dominated emotions
scholarship (Solomon 2003, 93). At heart, the cognitive approach maintains
that emotions are thought-ridden—that is, cognitive theories of emotions, in
their various forms, argue that emotions entail evaluations, appraisals,
judgments and beliefs (Nussbaum 2004; Solomon 1995). Emotions that entail
judgments of what is right, good and beneficial, or what is wrong, bad and
harmful, may be considered moral emotions and stand in contrast to emotions
which convey non-moral appraisals, such as likes (happiness, joy) or dislikes
(sadness, despair), comforts (contentment) or discomforts (anxiety), wants
(jealousy, envy) and so on. Moral emotions may entail the moral condemnation
of others (anger, resentment, contempt and disgust), condemnation of the self
(shame, remorse, embarrassment and guilt), recognition of the suffering of
others (compassion) or praise of others (gratitude) (Haidt 2001). Take, for
example, the emotion of resentment:
Resentment is an emotion which reflects [the victim’s] judgment that the
harmful treatment they experienced should not have been intentionally
inflicted on them by their assailants insofar as it is not appropriate given
their value and rank. Hence it presupposes that they have experienced
treatment they take to be demeaning and therefore wrong (Hampton 1998,
54–55).

In other words, resentment is an ‘idea-ridden response’ (Hampton 1998, 54)—a
judgement expressing the injustice of an act or set of actions.
By conceiving of emotions as judgments, the cognitive approach outlined thus
far deviates from common understandings of emotions as mere feelings or as the
reactive consequences of judgments. Yet this is not to suggest that emotions are
mere cognitive states. On the contrary, anger, along with all other emotions, is
more than a simple cognitive state; it also entails a bodily response (Prinz 2004,
10). What this means is that real, felt bodily emotions such as anger and
resentment are not just psychological outbursts, but judgments of disapprobation: they are moral judgments indicating that particular actions are wrong
because they entailed the infliction of undeserved harm or because they failed to
conform to particular accepted standards of behaviour.
The negative moral emotions do not simply constitute moral judgments,
however, but also drive action in response to those judgments (Jeffery 2014b,
183–191). That this is the case has long been accepted amongst theorists of
emotions and thus does not require detailed discussion here (Carver, Sutton, and

The forgiveness dilemma

43

Scheier 2000, 741). For some, the connection between emotions and motivation
is absolute, with the emotions system constituting the primary motivational
system for human behaviour, while, for others, emotions are just one factor that
motivates behaviour (Izard 1971). Given that emotions are judgments, where
justice is concerned the connection between emotions and the motivation to act
is even more immediate.
Forgiveness and revenge
More than most other emotions, resentment tends towards sustained obsession.
This is a function of its very nature as a form of moral judgment. Often
characterised as ‘the passion of justice denied’, it signifies a continuing failure to
put right the wrongs of the past (Govier 2002, 50). For this reason, ‘no
emotion’ is ‘more conducive to the grand act of revenge’ than resentment
(Solomon 1995, 267).1
Revenge, as Francis Bacon (1937, 13) wrote, ‘is a form of wild justice’. It is
the ‘original passion for justice’ (Solomon 1995, 272), the infliction of an injury,
‘motivated by anger or resentment’ and ‘exacted’ in response to a wrong (Hall
2008, 155). It seeks to restore a perceived justice imbalance, to ‘get even’. Thus,
although revenge is commonly viewed as an inappropriate response to the
infliction of wrongs, numerous writers have sought to highlight the importance
of the negative emotions that drive it, as well as the feeling, if not the acting out,
of vengeance itself. Adam Smith, in his theory of moral sentiments, thus wrote
that the ‘negative emotions protect our self-respect’ (Hall 2008, 159).
‘[A] person becomes contemptible’, he wrote, ‘who tamely sits still and submits
to insults, without attempting either to repel or to revenge them’ (Smith 1976, 34).
More recently, Solomon (1995, 41) has argued that: ‘not to feel vengeance
may ... be not a sign of virtue but a symptom of callousness and withdrawal, a
diminished sense of self and an amoral attitude to the world’. While neither goes
so far as to support the wild, excessive or ill-considered infliction of harm, both
recognise that ‘hatred and anger’, though the ‘greatest poison to the happiness
of a good mind’, necessitate that justice be done (Smith, quoted in Hall 2008,
160)—that is, justice does not require ‘emotional detachment’, but ‘arises from
and requires such feelings as resentment, jealousy, and envy as well as empathy
and compassion’ (Solomon 1995, 35). ‘Our vengeful passions’, Hall (2008,
173) concludes, ‘are the nagging reminders’ of the demands that justice be done.
Herein lies the primary iteration of the forgiveness dilemma: by overcoming
or eliminating resentment and anger, forgiveness ultimately denies the role that
the negative moral emotions play in making moral judgments and motivating
the pursuit of justice. On this basis, Brudholm (2008), Murphy (1995) and
others refute the ideal promoted in many reconciliation processes that victims of
serious wrongs should be encouraged to forgive in order to overcome their
negative emotions. Brudholm (2008, xiii), in particular, argues that ‘some
resentments may be justified and healthy’, and, further, that: ‘the refusal to

44

Renée Jeffery

forgive may itself reflect a moral protest and ambition that might be as
permissible, admirable, or human as the willingness to forgive’. When coupled
with doubts over the therapeutic benefits of forgiving, the argument against
forgiveness is doubly damning: not only is forgiveness an unreliable means of
overcoming the negative emotions, but these emotions have moral value, often
manifested in the pursuit of justice.
Yet, just as proponents of forgiveness make the mistake of assuming that
victims must choose between forgiveness and resentment, so too are its critics
mistaken when they assume that recognising the value of the negative emotions
precludes the need or desire to overcome them. This was foremost among the
forgiveness dilemmas faced by the victims of the Khmer Rouge as they came face
to face with their tormentor, Duch, at the ECCC.

Forgiveness and revenge at the ECCC
Despite Duch’s repeated pleas and the prominence of debate surrounding
forgiveness at the ECCC, not one of the 22 civil parties who testified before
the ECCC offered forgiveness.2 While some simply ignored the issue, others
addressed Duch’s pleas for forgiveness directly, providing reasoned explanations for their decisions not to forgive. In a statement read by her uncle in court,
one woman, whose father was killed at S-21, explained: ‘to grant forgiveness
comes down to saying that finally no serious crime was committed. To grant
forgiveness boils down to admitting that the atrocities committed do not touch
us deeply’ (quoted in Stover, Balthazard, and Koenig 2011, 529).
For her, the decision not to forgive was based, at least in part, on the sense
that forgiving would mean both wiping the slate clean and relinquishing her
own negative emotions. This expansive notion of forgiveness was not something
that she was willing to entertain.
The overt rejection of an expansive notion of forgiveness was widespread
among the civil parties. As one of the international co-lawyers representing them
explained, many of the victims felt not only that Duch’s pleas for forgiveness
were unjustified, but that his physical demonstrations in court were unacceptable. Not only did these actions place undue pressure on the victims, thereby
disrespecting their right to choose whether or not to forgive, but many of the
victims were offended and distressed by what they interpreted as the implication, inherent in his gestures, that Duch thought he could be accepted by and
reconciled to those he had harmed so gravely (Interview with Silke Studzinsky
2011, 6 December, Phnom Penh)—that is, they outwardly rejected the
suggestion that forgiveness, either in isolation or in concert with the ECCC
justice process, could possibly lead to meaningful reconciliation between the
victims and perpetrator, a view that accords with Eric Stover’s (2005, 15) crossnational study, which found no necessary connection between justice processes
and reconciliation.

The forgiveness dilemma

45

Perhaps one of the most eloquent and considered explanations for the
decision not to forgive, however, came from Rob Hamill, a New Zealander
whose brother Kerry was captured, incarcerated, tortured and killed at S-21
when his yacht strayed into Cambodian waters. Hamill was among the civil
parties to testify before the ECCC. His statement, as we will see shortly, was an
emotional, anguished and electrifying expression of the pain and suffering
caused by the loss of his brother. Hamill has proven to be an extraordinarily
self-reflective participant in the ECCC process, providing a wealth of insights
into his motivations for and experience of testifying through numerous media
interviews and his own documentary film, Brother Number One (2011). In
particular, on several occasions he has explained the tension he has experienced
between the desire to achieve therapeutic relief through relinquishing his
negative emotions and his reluctance to forgive Duch. In a radio interview after
the final judgment had been handed down in Case 001, finding Duch guilty of
crimes against humanity and grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions of 1949
(Judgment 2010, 559), Hamill was asked if he had forgiven Duch. He
responded: ‘I really tried to. I set out to try to understand his position. I went
over there with compassion in my heart and I almost felt there was an
expectation ... from family and friends that I would’ (Burns 2011).
Adopting a therapeutic forgiveness position, several people encouraged him to
forgive, arguing that: ‘You’ll feel better if you do forgive’. But, ultimately,
Hamill could not forgive Duch. ‘To do that’, he argued, ‘you have to see
genuine compassion and to see and believe that this person is truly remorseful
and I did not see that’ (ibid.).
Yet, in the case of Hamill at least, the refusal to forgive was not symptomatic of
a reluctance to overcome the negative emotions. Rather, he and others saw the
court process, and, in particular, the opportunity to confront Duch and explain to
him the hurt he had caused, as an important part of both the justice and the
healing processes. Through testimony, the civil parties made their suffering
tangible, creating a highly emotionally charged atmosphere in court. On
numerous occasions, the civil parties giving testimony broke down, requiring a
recess or the presence of a social worker or medical officer beside them in court to
regain control over their emotions. On at least one occasion, a civil party
collapsed after seeing a picture of a badly tortured prisoner presented to the court.
Of the civil parties who testified, it was Hamill who engaged the emotions most
explicitly when he told Duch directly: ‘I am angry beyond words with you’
(Testimony, Day 59, 108). Indeed, Hamill’s testimony earlier in the day provided
perhaps the most confronting expression of anger witnessed by the court. In it, he
addressed Duch directly and vividly, without tempering his words:
Duch, at times I’ve wanted to smash you—to use your words—in the same
way that you smashed so many others. At times, I’ve imagined you shackled,
starved, whipped and clubbed viciously—viciously. I have imagined your
scrotum electrified, being forced to eat your own faeces, being nearly

46

Renée Jeffery

drowned, and having your throat cut. I have wanted that to be your
experience, your reality. I have wanted you to suffer the way you made
Kerry and so many others (Testimony, Day 59, 104).

Following his courtroom tirade against Duch, Rob Hamill reflected that while a
part of him still wanted to harbour the feelings of vengeance he expressed before
the chamber, giving testimony was part of the process of ‘trying to let go’ (ibid.).
‘Today in this courtroom’, he told Duch, ‘I am giving you all that crushing
weight of emotion—the anger, the grief, and the sorrow. I’m placing this
emotional burden on your head, for it is you alone who created this burden
which no-one deserves’ (ibid.). Although some of the civil parties who testified
before the ECCC found that the initial emotional release they experienced was
not permanent, most agreed that some of their more extreme emotional
responses had faded or dissipated as a result. Thus, S-21 survivor Bou Meng
said: ‘Testifying helped me release some anger’; Neth Phally agreed and stated
that: ‘When I left the courtroom my feelings had been eased’ (quoted in Stover,
Balthazard, and Koenig, 2011, 531). Similarly, Chum Mey stated that:
Before entering the courtroom I felt tense in my chest. But after I talked to
the judges and related my story, I felt like all of this tenseness was released.
Like right now when I tell my story to visitors to Tuol Sleng, I can control
myself. I don’t cry like I used to. Before I testified, I kept thinking I should
probably see a psychiatrist, but after I testified I realized my feelings had
become normal (quoted in Stover, Balthazard, and Koenig, 2011, 532).

In part, the civil parties who testified before the ECCC seem to explain their
experience by reference to the theory that ‘revealing is healing’, which has
marked discourse surrounding many truth commissions (Hamber 2007, 160).
As Brandon Hamber explains, this theory suggests that, in psychological terms,
‘past traumas do not simply pass or disappear with the passage of time’.
Instead, he argues, ‘psychological restoration and healing can only occur
through providing space for survivors of violence to be heard, and for every
detail of that traumatic event to be re-experienced in a safe environment’
(Hamber 2007, 158). This view became popular with the rise of TRCs, and was
especially associated with the South African TRC. In particular, Archbishop
Desmond Tutu was fond of the claim that: ‘there is no healing without truth’
(quoted in Kiss 2000, 72). As the testimony of the psychologist Chhim
Sotherara revealed, however, the idea that ‘revealing is healing’ also permeated
the ECCC process. In his assessment:
civil parties had been suffering psychologically and they have been suffering
for many years, and they have expressed their anger and their emotions
according to what they have suffered, according to the theory that when one
can express their feeling or emotion publicly it is a kind of process to heal or
to reconciliate [sic] (Testimony, Day 64, 51–52).

The forgiveness dilemma

47

In the case of the ECCC, the idea that ‘revealing is healing’ certainly appears to
have resonated with many of the civil parties.
An increasing number of scholars are, however, beginning to question the
idea that truth-telling is somehow ‘cleansing’ (Stover 2005, 15). In particular,
although the South African TRC promoted the idea that ‘revealing is healing’,
its final report acknowledged that the results of testifying were decidedly mixed:
testifying brought healing to some, but certainly not all who spoke before the
commission (Hamber 2007, 161). In many cases, the report concluded,
‘testifying or making a statement “initiated more than it closed”’ (ibid.). Several
academic studies have confirmed this finding, with Allan and Allan’s investigation of the therapeutic benefits of the South African TRC noting that: ‘there are
no empirical or other data that suggest that any long-term healing followed for
witnesses who experienced catharsis while giving testimony to the TRC. On the
contrary, anecdotal evidence indicates that it sometimes caused immediate, and
maybe enduring, trauma’ (Allan and Allan 2000, 463). David Mendeloff takes a
slightly different view. He argues that: ‘Although there is little evidence that
truth-telling in general dramatically harms individuals, the notion that formal
truth-telling processes satisfy victims’ need for justice, ease their emotional and
psychological suffering, and dampen their desire for vengeance, remains highly
dubious’ (Mendeloff 2009, 592–593). Although it is not his intention, in thus
arguing, Mendeloff touches on the first key difference that sets the ECCC
process apart from other forms of truth-telling: in this case, formal truth-telling
contributed directly and tangibly to an official justice process.3
In emotional terms, participation in the ECCC process did not require a
passive relinquishing of the negative emotions for therapeutic reasons or in the
interests of social reconciliation, but the active pursuit of justice, coupled with a
self-conscious decision to let go of the negative emotions. In this, victim
participation at the ECCC seems to have provided an effective way of affording
victims the option of pursuing justice without seeking revenge. For example, in
her testimony, Im Sunthy stated that: ‘Some people say I am here for revenge,
but it is not true. I am here to find justice for my husband’ (Testimony, Day
61, 23). What is more, the ECCC process appears to have provided the means
by which the civil parties could overcome their negative emotions if they so
chose, but without pressuring them to do so or promoting forgiveness as the
means of achieving emotional relief—that is, the solution to the forgiveness
dilemma provided by the ECCC can be attributed, at least in part, to two
factors. First, participation allowed the civil parties’ negative emotions to
contribute to the pursuit of justice, and, second, by accepting (perhaps
implicitly) that overcoming the negative emotions was the sole prerogative of
the victims, the ECCC avoided provoking renewed resentments.
Yet, before heralding victim participation in criminal trials as the answer to
the forgiveness dilemma, several notes of caution must be sounded. Although
the ECCC process appears to have been beneficial for the civil parties who gave
testimony, it does not necessarily follow that these results would occur in other

48

Renée Jeffery

contexts. For one, with only 22 individuals giving testimony, the sample under
analysis here is very small. It is possible (though not inevitable) that with greater
numbers of participants, we would see greater variation in emotional responses.
Second, in the absence of the sort of systematic analysis that makes use of a
large sample, almost all the evidence of the emotional responses of the civil
parties at the ECCC has been anecdotal. As Mendeloff (2004, 365) notes, this
limitation is evident in the literature on the therapeutic benefits of truth-telling
more broadly. Yet, although we ought to be cautious in the conclusions we
draw from anecdotal evidence, the personal claims made by individual victims
remain the most useful resources that researchers currently have for understanding the forgiveness dilemma. Third, although almost all of the civil parties
experienced emotional relief after testifying in court, the long-term emotional
consequences of their participation remain unclear. Fourth, and finally, applying
the model of victim participation established by the ECCC to other contexts
rests on the assumption that other victims will be willing to take part in similar
processes. Yet, as Eric Stover (2005, x) notes, not all victims want their cases
heard in a court. Herein lies perhaps the most significant factor determining
both the ECCC’s success in addressing the forgiveness dilemma and the
limitations of its broader applicability: the civil parties who gave testimony
were self-selecting—that is, those who took part actively pursued not just civil
party status, but the opportunity to testify, because they believed that doing so
would bring them therapeutic benefits. For this group of highly motivated,
proactive individuals, their belief has so far turned out to be right.
Conclusion
In recent years, scholars and practitioners concerned with the practice of
forgiveness have, with few notable exceptions, focused on the merits and virtues
of overcoming anger and resentment in the aftermath of violent conflict. As they
and many victims of injustices attest, forgiveness bestows therapeutic benefits on
both the victims and perpetrators of wrongs, helps avoid ongoing cycles of
revenge, and contributes to personal and, in some cases, societal reconciliation.
These are, without question, worthy ends.
For all its merits, however, the practice of forgiveness is not a simply ‘good’
endeavour. Rather, it poses a moral dilemma, which is magnified in postconflict politics and in other contexts in which serious wrongs have been
perpetrated. Forgiveness, at its core, requires us to overcome our darkest
emotions—most commonly, anger and resentment. Yet these negative moral
emotions constitute a core component of our ability to judge that an injustice
has taken place and help to motivate us to seek justice in response. Many
proponents of forgiveness would not deny the role that has been identified for
the moral emotions in processes of making moral judgments and motivating
actions. On the contrary, proponents of restrictive forms of forgiveness, in
particular, might argue that this is their point: the experience of injustice

The forgiveness dilemma

49

provokes negative moral emotions, which, in turn, have the potential to result in
acts of revenge—an outcome that forgiveness aims to avoid. And yet, while
feelings of anger and resentment in the aftermath of undeserved harm are
common, acts of revenge are relatively rare.
Focusing on the case of Cambodia, this article has examined the role that
victim participation in human rights trials might play in allowing the victims of
serious wrongs the opportunity to overcome their negative moral emotions
without necessarily requiring forgiveness. Although it is by no means a perfect
institution, the ECCC provides an interesting model for how societies grappling
with violent histories might address those pasts in ways that do not disrespect or
unduly burden the victims. In allowing civil party participation in its criminal
trials, the ECCC provides the sense of formal retributive justice that many
victims desire. In particular, it has allowed the negative moral emotions
experienced by many victims to be channelled into the pursuit of justice,
thereby making an emotional manifestation other than revenge possible. At the
same time, the ECCC has managed to avoid precipitating the sorts of negative
emotions often associated with forgiveness by not mandating or expecting
forgiveness on the part of victims.
Finally, although the ECCC does not demand forgiveness from the victims of
the Khmer Rouge, it does not preclude it either. On the contrary, as Chhim
Sotherara argued, the pursuit of justice may itself facilitate forgiveness when and
if the victims so desire (Testimony, Day 64, 31). Rather, the point is that the
decision to forgive remains the sole prerogative of the victims. As Sotherara
noted in his testimony: ‘It’s going to be a long, drawn-out process for
forgiveness or the seeking for forgiveness’ (Testimony, Day 64, 57). Until
then, it has made a significant contribution to overcoming the negative moral
emotions of some of those who suffered at the hands of the Khmer Rouge.
Notes
1. While it is certainly the case that resentment does not lead inevitably to revenge, revenge
remains a manifestation, albeit extreme, of resentment.
2. There is no official data available on the religious affiliations of the civil parties who testified.
However, it can probably be assumed that all or most of the Khmer civil parties (20 of 22)
who testified are Buddhist.
3. Of course, this rests on the common assumption that justice must be of a criminal, retributive
nature—an idea that has been roundly refuted by proponents of restorative and reparative
justice in recent years.

References
Allan, Alfred, and Marietjie M. Allan. 2000. “The South African Truth and Reconciliation
Commission as a Therapeutic Tool.” Behavioral Sciences and the Law 18: 459–477.
doi:10.1002/1099-0798(2000)18:4<459::AID-BSL366>3.0.CO;2-T.
Arendt, Hannah. 1998. The Human Condition. 2nd ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Bacon, Francis. 1937. “Of Revenge.” In Essays, edited by R. F. Jones. New York: Odyssey Press.

50

Renée Jeffery

Baumeister, Roy F., Julie Juola Exline, and Kristen L. Sommer. 1998. “The Victim Role, Grudge
Theory, and Two Dimensions of Forgiveness.” In Dimensions of Forgiveness, edited by
Everett L. Worthington, Jr., 79–104. Philadelphia, PA: Templeton Foundation Press.
Biggar, Nigel. 2003a. “Making Peace or Doing Justice: Must We Choose?” In Burying the Past:
Making Peace and Doing Justice After Civil Conflict, edited by Nigel Biggar, 3–23.
Washington D.C: Georgetown University Press.
Bizot, François. 2009. “My Savior, Their Killer.” New York Times, February 17.
Boehm, Christopher. 1987. Blood Revenge: The Enactment and Management of Conflict in
Montenegro and other Tribal Societies. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Bole, William, Drew Christiansen, and Robert T. Hennemeyer. 2004. Forgiveness in International
Politics: An Alternative Road to Peace. Washington, DC: United States Conference of
Bishops.
Boraine, Alex. 2000. “Truth and Reconciliation in South Africa: The Third Way.” In Truth v
Justice: The Morality of Truth Commissions, edited by Robert I. Rotberg and Dennis
Thompson, 141–157. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Brudholm, Thomas. 2008. Resentment’s Virtue: Jean Améry and the Refusal to Forgive.
Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press.
Burns, Lindy. 2011. “Terror in Cambodia: Brother Number One.” ABC Melbourne, July 27.
Butler, Joseph. 1827. “Sermon VIII: Upon Resentment and Forgiveness of Injuries.” In Fifteen
Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel. Cambridge: Hilliard and Brown. Accessed July 18,
2014. http://anglicanhistory.org/butler/rolls/08.html.
Carver, Charles S., Steven K. Sutton, and Michael F. Scheier. 2000. “Action, Emotion and
Personality: Emerging Conceptual Integration.” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 26
(6): 741–751. doi:10.1177/0146167200268008.
Chandler, David. 1999. Voices from S-21: Terror and History in Pol Pot’s Secret Prison. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Chapman, Audrey. 2001. “Truth Commissions as Instruments of Forgiveness and Reconciliation.”
In Forgiveness and Reconciliation: Religion, Public Policy, and Conflict Transformation,
edited by Raymond G. Helmick and Rodney L. Petersen, 257–277. Philadelphia, PA:
Templeton Foundation Press.
Ciorciari, John D. 2006. “Introduction.” In The Khmer Rouge Tribunal, edited by John D.
Ciorciari, 11–27. Phnom Penh: Documentation Center of Cambodia.
Damasio, Antonio. 1994. Descartes’ Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain. New York:
Putnam.
Enright, Robert. 2001. Forgiveness Is a Choice: A Step-by-step Process for Resolving anger and
Restoring Hope. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Enright, Robert, Suzanne Freeman, and Julio Rique. 1998. “The Psychology of Interpersonal
Forgiveness.” In Exploring Forgiveness, edited by Robert D. Enright and Joanna North,
46–62. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
Govier, Trudy. 2002. Forgiveness and Revenge. London: Routledge.
Greene, Joshua. 2008. “The Secret Joke of Kant’s Soul.” In Moral Psychology, Volume 3: The
Neuroscience of Morality: Emotion, Brain Disorders, and Development, edited by Walter
Sinnott-Armstrong, 35–80. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Haidt, Jonathan. 2001. “The Emotional Dog and its Rational Tail: A Social Intuitionist Approach to
Moral Judgment.” Psychological Review 108 (4): 814–834. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.108.4.814.
Hall, Ian. 2008. “Avenging Evil: A Reconsideration.” In Confronting Evil in International
Relations, edited by Renée Jeffery, 151–178. New York: Palgrave.
Hamber, Brandon. 2007. “Forgiveness and Reconciliation: Paradise Lost or Pragmatism?” Peace
and Conflict: Journal of Peace Psychology 13 (1). doi:10.1037/h0094027.
Hamber, Brandon, and Grainne Kelly. 2004. A Working Definition of Reconciliation. Belfast:
Democratic Dialogue.

The forgiveness dilemma

51

Hampton, Jean. 1998. “Forgiveness, Resentment and hatred.” In, Forgiveness and Mercy, edited
by Jeffrie Murphy and Jean Hampton, 35–87. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Internal Rules. 2011. (Rev.7) of the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts for Cambodia
(as Revised on February 23).
Izard, Carroll E. 1971. The Face of Emotion. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Jeffery, Renée. 2011a. “Reason, Emotion and the Problem of World Poverty: Moral Sentiment
Theory and International Ethics.” International Theory: A Journal of International Politics,
Law and Philosophy 3 (1): 143–178. doi:10.1017/S1752971910000321.
Jeffery, Renée. 2011b. “Forgiveness, Amnesty and Justice: The Case of the Lord’s Resistance Army in
Northern Uganda.” Cooperation and Conflict 46 (1): 78–95. doi:10.1177/0010836710396853.
Jeffery, Renée. 2013. “Enduring Tensions: Transitional Justice in the Solomon Islands.” Pacific
Review 26 (2): 153–175. doi:10.1080/09512748.2012.759261.
Jeffery, Renée. 2014a. “Reconciliation and the Rule of Law in the Solomon Islands.” In Transitional
Justice in the Asia Pacific, edited by Renée Jeffery and Hun Joon Kim, 195–227. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Jeffery, Renée. 2014b. Reason and Emotion in International Ethics. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Jeffery, Renée. 2014c. “Beyond Repair? Moral Reparations at the Khmer Rouge Tribunal.” Journal
of Human Rights 13 (1): 103–119. doi:10.1080/14754835.2013.824283.
Jeffery, Renée. 2014d. Amnesties, Accountability and Human Rights. Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press.
Jeffery, Renée, and Hun Joon Kim. 2014. “Introduction: New Horizons: Transitional Justice in the
Asia-Pacific.” In Transitional Justice in the Asia Pacific, edited by Renée Jeffery and Hun Joon
Kim, 1–32. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Judgment. 2010. in Case 001/18-07-2007/eccc/sc (KAING Guek Eav), July 26.
Kiss, Elizabeth. 2000. “Moral Ambition within and beyond Political Constraints.” In Truth v.
Justice: The Morality of Truth Commissions, edited by Robert I. Rotberg and Dennis
Thompson, 68–98. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Lamb, Sharon. 2005. “Forgiveness Therapy: The Context and Conflict.” Journal of Theoretical
and Philosophical Psychology 25: 61–80. doi:10.1037/h0091251.
Lamb, Sharon, and Jeffrie Murphy, eds. 2002. Before Forgiving: Cautionary Views on Forgiveness
in Psychotherapy. New York: Oxford University Press.
Mendeloff, David. 2004. “Truth-Seeking, Truth-Telling, and Postconflict Peacebuilding: Curb
the Enthusiasm?” International Studies Review 6: 355–380. doi:10.1111/j.15219488.2004.00421.x.
Mendeloff, David. 2009. “Trauma and Vengeance: Assessing the Psychological and Emotional
Effects of Post-Conflict Justice.” Human Rights Quarterly 31 (3): 592–623. doi:10.1353/
hrq.0.0100.
Minow, Martha. 1998. Between Vengeance and Forgiveness. Boston: Beacon Press.
Murphy, Jeffrie G. 1988. “Forgiveness, Mercy and the Retributive Emotions.” Criminal Justice
Ethics 7 (2): 52–59.
Murphy, Jeffrie G. 2003. Getting Even: Forgiveness and Its Limits. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Newberry, Paul A. 2001. “Joseph Butler on Forgiveness: A Presupposed Theory of Emotion.”
Journal of the History of Ideas 26: 233–244. doi:10.1353/jhi.2001.0016.
North, Joanna. 1998. “The ‘Ideal’ of Forgiveness: A Philosopher’s Exploration.” In Exploring
Forgiveness, edited by Robert D. Enright and Joanna North, 15–34. Madison: Wisconsin
University Press.
Nussbaum, Martha. 2004. Hiding from Humanity: Disgust, Shame, and the Law. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Prinz, Jesse J. 2004. Gut Reactions: A Perceptual Theory of Emotion. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.

52

Renée Jeffery

Roberts, Robert C. 1995. “Forgivingness.” American Philosophical Quarterly 32 (4): 289–306.
Schimmel, Solomon. 2004. Wounds Not Healed by Time: The Power of Repentance and
Forgiveness. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Shriver, Donald W. 2003. “Where and When in Political Life is Justice Served by Forgiveness?”
In Burying the Past: Making Peace and Doing Justice after Civil Conflict, edited by Nigel
Biggar, 25–44. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.
Smith, Adam. 1976. The Theory of Moral Sentiments. Edited by D. D. Raphael and A. L. Macfie.
Indianapolis, IN: Liberty Fund.
Solomon, Robert C. 1995. A Passion for Justice: Emotions and the Origins of the Social Contract.
Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
Solomon, Robert C. 2003. What Is An Emotion? Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Stover, Eric. 2005. The Witnesses: War Crimes and the Promise of Justice in The Hague.
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Stover, Eric, Mychelle Balthazard, and Alexa Koenig. 2011. “Confronting Duch: Civil Party
Participation in Case 001 at the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia.”
International Review of the Red Cross 882: 503–546. doi:10.1017/S1816383111000439.
Testimony heard before the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia. Accessed July
18, 2014. http://www.eccc.gov.kh/en.
Tutu, Desmond. 1999. No Future without Forgiveness. New York: Random House.
Worthington, Everett. 2001. Five Steps to Forgiveness. Crown.

Copyright of Australian Journal of International Affairs is the property of Routledge and its
content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the
copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email
articles for individual use.

